## Abstract {.page_break_before}

The rapid global spread of the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has strained existing healthcare and testing resources, making the identification and prioritization of individuals most at-risk a critical challenge.
A recent study of patients in China discovered an association between ABO blood type and SARS-CoV-2 infection status by comparing COVID-19 patients with the general population.
Whether blood type is associated with increased COVID-19 morbidity or mortality remains unknown.
We used observational healthcare data on 1559 individuals (682 COV+) with known blood type in the New York Presbyterian (NYP) hospital system to assess the association between ABO+Rh blood type and SARS-CoV-2 infection status, intubation, and death.
In tests of individual blood groups, a higher proportion of blood group A and a lower proportion of blood group O were found among COVID-19 patients compared to those testing negative for the virus, though in both cases the result is significant only in Rh positive blood types.
A meta-analysis of NYP data with previously reported data from China uncovered significantly increased A and B and significantly decreased O blood groups among COVID-19 patients.
Our data do not provide strong evidence of associations between blood group and intubation or death among COVID-19 patients.
While our results are based on preliminary observational data collected during the care of patients and should not be used to guide clinical practice, we find further evidence of recently-discovered associations between blood group and SARS-CoV-2 infection status and new evidence of associations between B and Rh blood groups and COVID-19.
