## Background

The novel Coronavirus disease (COVID-19, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus) has spread rapidly across the globe and has caused over 21.1 million confirmed infections and over 761,000 deaths worldwide as of August 17, 2020 [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200817-weekly-epi-update-1.pdf].
A number of risk factors for COVID-19 morbidity and mortality are known, including age, sex, smoking, hypertension, diabetes, and chronic cardiovascular and respiratory diseases [@doi:10/ggnxb3; @doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2020.04.021].

Recent work has demonstrated an association between ABO blood types and COVID-19 risk.
Using data from Wuhan and Shenzhen, Zhao et al. found a greater proportion A and a lower proportion of O blood types among COVID-19 patients, relative to the general populations of Wuhan and Shenzhen [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.11.20031096].
Similarly, using a meta-analysis of data from Italy and Spain, Ellinghaus et al. [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2020283] found a higher risk of COVID-19 among A and a lower risk among O blood types.
Conversely, however, they estimated lower odds of mechanical ventilation for all non-O types, though the estimated odds ratios were not statistically significant at the 5% level for this outcome.

The ABO blood type trait reflects polymorphisms within the *ABO* gene.
This gene is associated with a number of other traits, including risk factors for COVID-19 morbidity and mortality.
For example, genome-wide association studies have associated variants within *ABO* to activity of the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) [@doi:10.1038/tpj.2009.70], red blood cell count, hemoglobin concentration, hematocrit, [@doi:10.1038/ng.531; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.042; @doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.016; @doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0047-6], von Willebrand factor [@doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.869156; @doi:10.1002/ana.23838; @doi:10.1038/ejhg.2015.222; @doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.034532], myocardial infarction [@doi:10/fms4dn; @doi:10.1038/ng.3396], coronary artery disease [@doi:10.1038/ng.784; @doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.002707; @doi:10.1038/ng.3396; @doi:10.1038/ng.3913; @doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.312086], ischemic stroke [@doi:10.1002/ana.23838; @doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.002707; @doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0058-3], type 2 diabetes [@doi:10.2337/db16-1253; @doi:10.1038/s41467-018-04951-w; @doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0241-6], and venous thromboembolism [@doi:10.1182/blood-2008-11-190389; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0025581; @doi:10.1111/j.1538-7836.2012.04810.x; @doi:10.1002/gepi.21731; @doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.01.019; @doi:10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.116.001643; @doi:10.1182/blood.2019000435; @doi:10.1038/s41588-019-0519-3].
A 2012 meta-analysis found that, in addition to individual variants, a non-O blood type is among the most important genetic risk factors for venous thromboembolism [@doi:10.1055/s-0032-1315758].
Moreover, coagulopathy is a common issue for COVID-19 patients [@doi:10.1111/jth.14817; @doi:10.1111/jth.14869; @doi:10.1111/jth.14888; @doi:10.1016/j.thromres.2020.04.024; @doi:10/ggx259; @doi:10.1055/s-0040-1710018; @doi:10.7326/M20-2003], and risk of venous thromboembolism must be carefully managed [@doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2020.05.015; @doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2020.05.015].

The numerous associations between conditions and both blood type and COVID-19 provide reason to believe true associations may exist between blood type and morbidity and mortality due to COVID-19.
In addition, previous work has identified associations between ABO blood groups and a number of different infections or disease severity following infections, including SARS-CoV-1 [@doi:10.1001/jama.293.12.1450-c], _P. falciparum_ [@doi:10/db42m2], _H. pylori_ [@doi:10.1126/science.8018146], Norwalk virus [@doi:10.1038/nm860], hepatitis B virus [@doi:10.1002/ijc.26376], and _N. gonorrhoeae_ [@doi:10.1093/infdis/133.3.329].

Rh(D) phenotypes (positive and negative Rh blood types) are associated with very few diseases compared to ABO [@doi:10.1182/blood-2010-01-261859].
Like ABO, Rh type is important for type compatibility and immune response.
For example, hemolytic disease of the newborn is a concern when Rh(D) is mismatched between mother and offspring [@doi:10.1111/bjh.14757].
Other studies have found evidence that Rh-positive individuals are protected against the effects of latent toxoplasmosis [@doi:10.1242/jeb.073635], though *Toxoplasma gondii* is a eukaryotic parasite [@doi:10.1016/B978-012369542-0/50005-2], not a virus like SARS-CoV-2.

Within the United States, New York suffered among the worst outbreaks during the early phases of the pandemic.
As of August 22, New York has recorded 228,144 confirmed infections and 19,014 deaths [@url:https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/covid/covid-19-data.page].
We sought to understand the association between SARS-CoV-2 infection/COVID-19 and blood type using electronic health record (EHR) data from New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Irving Medical Center (NYP/CUIMC) hospital in New York, USA.
We compared both ABO and Rh(D) blood types, and we investigated initial infection status and two severe COVID-19 outcomes: intubation and death.
We evaluated potential confounding due to population stratification using a multivariate analysis, and we report clinically meaningful measures of effect.

## Results

We determined blood types using laboratory measurements recorded in the NYP/CUIMC EHR system.
After removing likely errors, such as individuals with contradictory blood type results, we identified 14,112 adult individuals with known blood type who received at least one SARS-CoV-2 swab test (Table 1).
Individuals with a single positive test were considered COV+, even if they had previous or subsequent negative tests.
Individuals were considered initially COV+ if they first tested positive on their first recorded test or within the following 96 hours.
We evaluated associations between blood types and outcomes using three comparisons: infection prevalence among initial tests, and survival analysis for intubation and death among infected individuals.
We report on clinical data as of August 1, 2020.

<div id='tbl:1'>
$include content/table1.html
</div>

Table 1: Summary demographics for SARS-CoV-2-tested individuals at NYP/CUIMC, stratified by blood type.
N is the number of individuals having the given blood type who have at least one recorded test for SARS-CoV-2.
Age is reported as the median and interquartile range (25-75).
Percents are reported relative to individuals having the blood type, except the N row, where percents are by blood group type (ABO or Rh) and are relative to all individuals in the study.

<!-- Prevalence among initial tests -->

The prevalence of initial infection was higher among A and B blood types and lower among AB types, compared with type O (Table 2, Figure [@fig:figure1]).
Blood type frequencies vary across ancestry groups [@doi:10.1111/j.1537-2995.2004.03338.x], so we evaluated the confounding effect of ancestry by effect estimates with and without adjustment for race/ethnicity, a proxy for ancestry.
We compared infection prevalence with linear regression, using reference groups O for ABO and Rh-positive for Rh(D), and using bootstrap to compute 95% confidence intervals for each estimate [@doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2009.03.012].
With adjustment for patient race and ethnicity, A and B prevalences remained higher than O, while the prevalence difference between AB and O shrank to zero.
Rh(D) negative individuals had a 2.7% lower risk of initial infection after adjustment for ancestry, consistent with a lower risk before adjustment.

Many individuals received multiple SARS-CoV-2 tests, and all recorded tests were performed in healthcare facilities that themselves pose a risk of infecting each patient.
To avoid bias with respect to healthcare utilization, length of hospital stay, and potential in-patient infection, we evaluated the prevalence of infection among individuals only during their first encounters at NYP/CUIMC.
In addition, to account for the considerable risk of false negative tests [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25855; @doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.04.004] and the fact that providers did not necessarily rule out COVID-19 following an initial negative SARS-CoV-2 test result [@doi:10.1128/JCM.00297-20], any positive test during the first 96 hours of an encounter was considered evidence of initial infection.

<!-- Survival analysis for intubation and death -->

Next, we examined intubation and death using a survival framework to understand how blood type affects progression to disease outcomes over time.
Specifically, we used the Fine-Gray model [@doi:10.1080/01621459.1999.10474144] to estimate cumulative incidence functions by blood type while accounting for competing risks and adjusting covariates.
Death and recovery were competing events for intubation and recovery was a competing event for death.
Cohort entry was defined as the time of a patient's first positive test result or the start of a hospital encounter if the first positive test occurred during the first 96 hours of the hospitalization.
In accordance with CDC guidelines for returning to work [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/return-to-work.html; @url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/duration-isolation.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fcoronavirus%2F2019-ncov%2Fcommunity%2Fstrategy-discontinue-isolation.html], we defined a patient as having recovered only when 10 days had passed since the patient entered the cohort and only once the patient had been discharged.
Patient outcomes beyond August 1, 2020 were censored.

Blood type A was at decreased risk of both intubation and death relative to type O, while type AB was at increased risk of both outcomes (Figure 1, Table 2).
Conversely, we found that type B individuals were at higher risk of intubation but at lower risk of death, compared with type O.
Individuals negative for Rh(D) were at decreased risk for both intubation and death, consistent with a lower risk of initial infection.
Overall, we estimate between 0.1 and 8.2 percent absolute risk differences between blood groups, after adjusting for race and ethnicity.

![Estimated risk differences for blood types during the period from March 10 to August 1, 2020.
Values represent risk differences for each blood type relative to the reference groups: O for ABO and positive for Rh(D).
Prevalence risk differences were computed using linear regression, while intubation and death were computed using the Fine-Gray model [@doi:10.1080/01621459.1999.10474144].
Differences and 95% confidence intervals (CI) computed using Austin's method, including bootstrap [@doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2009.03.012].
Adjusted models include race and ethnicity as covariates.
](/Users/zietzm/Documents/projects/abo_covid/forest.png){#fig:figure1}

<div id='tbl:1'>
$include content/table2.html
</div>

Table 2: Effect size estimates for blood types with and without correction for race and ethnicity.
Risks computed using linear regression (for prevalence) or the cumulative incidence from Fine-Gray models (for intubation and death).
Risk differences computed relative to O ABO blood type and positive Rh(D) type.
NNT indicates the number needed to treat to prevent one outcome, equal to the inverse risk difference.

## Discussion

Our results are based on data collected as part of hospital care during the course of a pandemic.
As such, our data are highly enriched for severly-ill patients, and the absolute risk values we report are not generalizable to all SARS-CoV-2-infected individuals.
A considerable fraction of infections are mild or asymptomatic [@doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.020; @doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0869-5; @doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.10182; @doi:10.1016/j.cmi.2020.04.040], while our data represent predominantly the most severe cases.
All our effect estimates are conditional on presentation to the hospital.

Appropriate control sets are an advantage of using hospital record data.
For each comparison, our criteria differed between cases and controls only with respect to the outcome of interest, and we found concordance between SARS-CoV-2-tested individuals and the general population at NYP/CUIMC in terms of blood type (Supplementary table **REFERENCE HERE**).
Consequently, our results are not affected by selection bias with respect to blood type, unlike some other blood type case/control study designs---particularly those using blood donors as controls, where enrichment of type O can be expected [@doi:10.1093/ije/dyt095; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2020283].

We selected cohort entry and exit criteria to account for testing issues.
For example, while tests of infection are conducted upon admission, two sources of error are the rate of false negatives and the time delay between the administration of a test and the return of its result.
We attempted to account for these biases by setting cohort entry at the time of first contact with the hospital, when the patient tested positive less than 96 hours thereafter.
This definition is imperfect, as 96 hours is sufficient for an individual infected shortly after admission to test positive (albeit with probability roughly 0.33) [@doi:10.7326/M20-1495], but it is necessary to allow sufficient adjustment for the considerable time delay and retesting following false negatives.

Since SARS-CoV-2 infection is transient, and since many previously infected patients later received intubations for unrelated reasons (e.g. unrelated surgery), we defined recovery in an attempt to exclude intubation and death outcomes that were not plausibly related to COVID-19.
Specifically, recovery was defined as discharge from the hospital plus a minimum 10 day interval following cohort entry, and outcomes following recovery were not considered in our survival analyses.
This definition is imperfect, as patients may be discharged prematurely and later return following onset of severe symptoms.
Moreover the 10 day cutoff is based on CDC guidelines [@url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/return-to-work.html; @url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/duration-isolation.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fcoronavirus%2F2019-ncov%2Fcommunity%2Fstrategy-discontinue-isolation.html], which may be refined as additional evidence becomes available.
Further work is needed to refine the definition of recovery and to determine which outcomes may be causally linked to COVID-19.

The *ABO* gene is highly polymorphic [@doi:10.1017/S0003480001008995], and blood types have considerably different distributions across ancestry groups [@doi:10.1111/j.1537-2995.2004.03338.x].
While genetic data were not available for the patients included in our study, we used self-reported race and ethnicity as an imperfect proxy for genetic ancestry.
Adjusting for these covariates had a noticable effect on our comparison of infection prevalence, but did not have an equally relevant effect on intubation or death (Figure 1, Table 2).
This suggests that blood type has a lesser, more confounded effect on infection prevalence than on intubation or death following confirmed infection and hospital encounters.

After adjusting for ancestry by proxies of race and ethnicity, we found that ABO types A, AB, and B all conferred equal or greater risk of an initial positive test compared to type O.
These results are consistent with an association discovered for SARS-CoV-1, in which O blood groups were significantly less common among SARS patients [@doi:10.1001/jama.293.12.1450-c].

We found consistent evidence for protective associations between Rh negative blood groups and SARS-CoV-2 infection, intubation, death.
Negative Rh blood groups are less common, representing only 9% of individuals in our data.
In addition, Rh groups are not distributed equally across race/ethnicity groups, with enrichment of Rh-negative among white and non-Hispanic individuals (Table 1).
Race and ethnicity cannot fully capture ancestry, so the associations between Rh blood types and COVID-19 we report may still be confounded by ancestry, even after adjustment.
Further work is needed to better understand the associations between Rh(D) blood groups and COVID-19 and to unravel potential residual confounding due to ancestry.


## Methods

We selected criteria for cohort entry and exit to account for provider practice and the sensitivity of swab tests.
Due to the high risk for false negatives [@doi:10.1002/jmv.25855; @doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.04.004], providers did not rule out COVID-19 following a single negative SARS-CoV-2 swab test [@doi:10.1128/JCM.00297-20].
A patient presenting to the emergency department while exhibiting the symptoms of COVID-19 would be treated as a COVID-19 patient immediately, not just following a positive test result.
Such a patient would be tested soon after admission but would be retested if they appear to be a COVID-19 patient despite an initial negative test result.
To account for false negatives, retesting following false negatives, and the time between test administration and test results, we considered any positive test during the first 96 hours of an encounter to be evidence of initial infection.
In addition, we considered the start of such an encounter as the cohort entry time, rather than the time of the first positive test result.

We excluded individuals below age 18 from our analysis.

We considered EHR data up to August 1, 2020.
We conducted our analyses using the R language, using the `cmprsk` package [@doi:10.1214/aos/1176350951] implementation of the Fine-Gray model.
While our data from NYP/CUIMC are protected by HIPAA and cannot be released, we have made all code used for our analysis available at <https://github.com/zietzm/abo_covid_analysis>.
The manuscript was written [openly on GitHub](https://github.com/zietzm/abo_covid) using Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128].


## Supplemental information

![Flow diagram of inclusion and exclusion criteria for the cohort used.
Numbers indicate the number of patients in each group.
Groups on the right were excluded.
](images/flow_diagram.png){#fig:supplement tag="S1" width="5in"}


$include content/table_covid_vs_general.html
